= school_days

* http://github.com/rwilcox/school_days

== DESCRIPTION:

Like Business Time (https://github.com/bokmann/business_time), this gem has support for domain specific dates.

Unlike Business Time, School Days focuses on the demands of keeping a school calendar


== FEATURES:

With School Days you can:

  * 1.days.from_now.school_day?
  * Date.civil(2011, 05, 31).school_night?
  * 2.school_days.from_now
  
In the school days configuration you can
  * Set the start and end date of a school session (as in: when does school break for summer, then resume)
  * Be able to set exceptional "in" days ("Normally, there is no school on Saturday, but we need to in this case")
  * Be able to set exceptional "out" days (Weather days, for example)

== PROBLEMS
School Days only handles school day calculations. Unlike business time, which includes hour and minute level calculations, School Days deals only with days. This is a reasonable tradeoff, and does have some implementation advantages.

For example, most school districts define a school day as being at least 4 hours of instructional time. If we supported sub-day calculations then the possibility of school being cancelled after 2 hours exists, and school days vs school hours getting unsynced is a possibility.

Yes, I acknowledge that this might be a problem, as technically a school year is N hours long (not M days). Schools might gain an extra day, in time of prolonged emergency, by adding an extra few minutes onto their school day (for the last 10 weeks, for example).

This gem focuses on the naive solution of managing this at the day level, and avoids this kind of accounting practice.

Another potential problem is using the N.school_day.before/after syntax will not handle exceptionally included days that land outside the earliest start date  and latest end date defined in the school sessions section.

If you really need to define an exceptional included day outside the school year please submit a patch... else just extend your start dates or end dates. Yes, I do consider this a major drawback, and may reconsider this feature in the future... right now I don't need it enough to hold up release of this gem.


== SYNOPSIS:

Yes, I know a lot about school calendars and how they operate. My mom is a school teacher (Hi Mom!!!), who taught in the same school us kids went to... so I learned a lot about school scheduling.

I learned even more over the years when various disasters (snow storms, fires) happened and I watched the school calendar being adjusted in various ways.

== REQUIREMENTS:

This gem is meant to be used in a Rails (2) project. It will probably work in a Rails 3 environment, but this hasn't been tested yet (and I know the generator will not work)

== INSTALL:

gem install school_days

in your Rails project, execute the generator to get a yaml file that gives you calendar configuration options

script/generate school_days_config

This will install an initializer and a yaml file (config/school_days.yml).


== CONFIGURING SCHOOL DAYS:

School days are a fickle beast. This gem has intelligent defaults, but I've also seen an amazing amount of variety in school calendars

config/school_days.yml has one top level key (school_days) with the following subkeys:

* school_sessions

A school might have one session (think a school that runs from August until June, with a 3 month summer vacation). A school might also run on an increasingly popular 10 week session with 2 week vacation, running all year.

The school sessions structure also allows this gem to be used by higher education (semester, trimester, and quarter system schools), in addition to primary/secondary education.

Each subkey in the sessions section are named (arbitrary name), but each subkey must have a start_date and end_date.


* exceptions

By default, school_days assumes that every week day during a session is a school day. This is incorrect, and you can configure these exceptions here.

This key has two subkeys:

  * holidays
  
  This is a flat list of dates where there is no class
  
  * included_days
  
  I've seen schools have school days on a Saturday, in very rare circumstances. included_days list days where you would normally not have school (weekends)... but you do this year.

Note that exceptional days should fall in the school year as a whole (see the above note about FixNum#school_days.from)

== WHAT THIS GEM DOES NOT DO: 

This gem is meant for ONE school calendar. This gem does not address the situation where you are (for example) writing a state level website and have multiple school districts each with their own calendar.

If you do need such functionality, I suggest you make a pull request.

It also does not deal with in-service days. This gem is only worried about days children are in school.

This gem also relies on manual configuration every year. It can not possibly know the school holidays of your individual school, so it doesn't try. I realize this requires someone to remember to update the configuration to put new school information in.


== NOTE ON PATCHES/PULL REQUESTS:

* Fork the project.
* Make your feature addition or bug fix.
* Add tests for it. This is important so I don’t break it in a future version unintentionally.
* Commit, do not mess with rakefile, version, or history. (if you want to have your own version, that is fine but bump version in a commit by itself I can ignore when I pull)
* Send me a pull request. Bonus points for topic branches.

* I use GitFlow <https://github.com/nvie/gitflow> to develop, so bonus points for that.


== (GENERATED) Specifications for this gem

The following are generated specifications for this gem. Computers know very little about making sense, *however* these should give you some idea of the capability of this gem

    Config
      Config should load a file with one session with no errors. 
      Config should load a file with two sessions correctly. 
      exceptional included days should only include exceptional included days, as Ruby date objects. 
      holiday exceptions should only include listed holiday exceptions, as Ruby Date objects. 
      when loading a file with multiple sessions should be able to find the first start date. 
      when loading a file with multiple sessions should be able to find the last end date. 
      when loading a file with one session should be able to find the end date. 
      when loading a file with one session should be able to find the start date. 
      when loading an invalid config file should throw a Runtime error when we're missing start or end dates for a session. 
    DateExtension
      Date instances should Date should respond to school_day?. 
      Date instances should return false for school_day? if the day is a weekend. 
      Date instances should return false for school_day? if the day is flagged as a holiday. 
      Date instances should return false if the day is not a school night. 
      Date instances should return true before an exceptional included day. 
      Date instances should return true for school_day if the day is a weekday. 
      Date instances should return true for school_day? if a normally off day is flagged as an included day. 
      Date instances should return true if the day is a school night. 
      Date instances should return true when the date is equal to the last date of a session. 
      Date instances should return true when the date is equal to the start date of a session. 
      Date instances when looking at a single school session should return false for school_day? if the date is outside the session (and not in exceptional included days). 
      Date instances when looking at a single school session should return true for school_day? if the date is inside the session (and not in exceptional included days). 
      Date instances when looking at multiple school sessions should return false for school_day if the weekday is between school sessions. 
      Date instances when looking at multiple school sessions should return false for school_day? if a weekday is is outside ALL of the sessions (and not in exceptional included days). 
      Date instances when looking at multiple school sessions should return false for school_day? if a weekend is is outside ALL of the sessions (and not in exceptional included days). 
      Date instances when looking at multiple school sessions should return true for school_day? if the date is outside one session, but inside another. 
    FixnumExtension
      when adding a school day should elegantly handle a situation where we go outside the school year. 
      when adding a school day should move forward one week when adding 5 school days. 
      when adding a school day should move forward onto an exceptional day. 
      when adding a school day should move to Monday (if tomorrow is a weekend). 
      when adding a school day should move to the next session if we have multiple sessions. 
      when adding a school day should move to tomorrow (if tomorrow is a school day). 
      when adding a school day should skip exceptional holidays. 
      when subtracting a school day should elegantly handle a situation where we go outside the school year. 
      when subtracting a school day should move back one week when adding 5 school days. 
      when subtracting a school day should move backwards onto an exceptional day. 
      when subtracting a school day should move to Friday (if yesterday is a weekend). 
      when subtracting a school day should move to the previous session if we have multiple sessions. 
      when subtracting a school day should move to yesterday (if yesterday is a school day). 
      when subtracting a school day should skip exceptional holidays. 
    Skipping TestGeneratorHelper because it doesn't map to a Class
    Skipping TestHelper because it doesn't map to a Class
    SchoolDay
      test_truth
    SchoolDaysCalculator
      identifying if a date is in the range of the whole school year with a single session should return false when it falls OUTSIDE of the school year. 
      identifying if a date is in the range of the whole school year with a single session should return true when it falls in the school year. 
      identifying if a date is in the range of the whole school year with many sessions should return false when it falls OUTSIDE of the school year. 
      identifying if a date is in the range of the whole school year with many sessions should return true when it falls in the school year. 

== LICENSE:

(The MIT License)

Copyright (c) 2011 Ryan Wilcox

Permission is hereby granted, free of charge, to any person obtaining
a copy of this software and associated documentation files (the
'Software'), to deal in the Software without restriction, including
without limitation the rights to use, copy, modify, merge, publish,
distribute, sublicense, and/or sell copies of the Software, and to
permit persons to whom the Software is furnished to do so, subject to
the following conditions:

The above copyright notice and this permission notice shall be
included in all copies or substantial portions of the Software.

THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED 'AS IS', WITHOUT WARRANTY OF ANY KIND,
EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO THE WARRANTIES OF
MERCHANTABILITY, FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE AND NONINFRINGEMENT.
IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHORS OR COPYRIGHT HOLDERS BE LIABLE FOR ANY
CLAIM, DAMAGES OR OTHER LIABILITY, WHETHER IN AN ACTION OF CONTRACT,
TORT OR OTHERWISE, ARISING FROM, OUT OF OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE
SOFTWARE OR THE USE OR OTHER DEALINGS IN THE SOFTWARE.